I do think that this whole business of
individual rights versus collective
rights is an interesting one so I am
putting out a challenge to my fellow
Canadian youtubers particularly those on
the left is this a good system of rights
we have in this country there is an
interesting asymmetry between the way
Canada is perceived from the outside and
how Canadians tend to feel about their
own political processes institutions and
traditions from the outside looking in
Canada is often perceived as much more
oppressive than it really is in part
because there may be contrasting
hysteria about the United States of
America to propaganda about how
wonderful life is in Canada so Canada
seems very progressive and
forward-thinking credence is America
but in part also because we have a
constitution written in the year 1982
technically it's called the Charter of
Rights and Freedoms
not the Constitution technically it's an
annex to the British North America Act
let's not get in the details in effect
the constitution of Canada was only
written in 1982 so for many people from
the outside looking in they think wow it
must be wonderful to live in a country
where you're not encumbered by centuries
of tradition or by having a constitution
written in the sort of them befuddled
opaque language of centuries past full
of uncomfortable compromises about
slavery colonialism imperialism that
must be wonderful and Canadians never
see it that way and never feel that way
we tend to feel that we're trapped in a
tremendously conservative anti
revolutionary regime that was defined in
the first place by a refusal to
participate in a refusal to countenance
or legitimate the American steps taken
towards democracy we were the people the
so called United Empire Loyalists who
decided to remain loyal to king and
country to follow the British colonial
path so let's just start with an
inspirational quotation from that 1982
Canadian Constitution so you get a feel
of just how hip and postmodern and
postcolonial and forward-looking our
Constitution really gets Canada
advocates the abolition of imperialism
colonialism and any other form of
aggression Dominion or exploitation in
the relations between peoples as well as
simultaneous and controlled general
disarmament the dissolution of political
and military blocks the establishment of
a collective security system with view
to the creation of an international
order that is capable of ensuring peace
and justice in the relations between
peoples Canada recognizes people's
rights to self-determination
independence and the development as well
as the right of insurrection against all
forms of oppression isn't that isn't
that wonderful rejecting imperialism
rejecting colonialism doesn't this sound
like a like the kind of forward-looking
positive optimistic 20th century
Constitution you'd expect a country like
Canada have I just quoted for you the
Constitution of Portugal written in 1974
at a very interesting confrontation with
a professor at the University of
Victoria not too many years ago came
into the classroom and he was giving
this very fiery dramatic performance
telling the students what a
revolutionary forward-looking document
the Constitution of Canada is this same
document from the 1980s the Charter of
Rights and Freedoms telling these
students I think every single student in
the classroom except for myself was a
First Nations person an indigenous
Canadian and a divinity
I think it was the only white person
there maybe there was one other white
person I forget but very few students in
the class he was telling them that our
Constitution holds up the rights of
indigenous peoples overturns centuries
of colonialism and oppression and that
it reaches out to this tremendous
history we have of signing treaties
making a commitment with these people
always anniversaries he said it takes
those treaties and it proudly declares
that from now on though
are the law of the land and when it was
question period I put my hand up and the
first thing I said to him was you know
I've read the constitution of Portugal
the constitution of Portugal as a
constitution written by a revolutionary
country that explicitly says they reject
their history of colonialism they reject
their history of imperialism they reject
their history of slavery against
indigenous peoples of South America
places like Brazil you can imagine
enslavement of peoples in Africa it
actually says those things in the text
there are are countries around the world
that have constitutions that make these
kinds of declarations you're saying
Canada is not one of them and I
challenged him on two points the perming
army is there a single sentence in in
the Charter of Rights and Freedoms
that has a single word along the lines
of what you've just paraphrased or
quoted from it is there a single
sentence there about the importance of
indigenous peoples or regretting the
history of community for the rest of
that or are you actually basing all this
claim about the one kind of suffix the
one appendix the one little thing tacked
on the end where it says notwithstanding
the details here are stated out this
won't abrogate our treaty obligations
than it people there's this little
little footnote to a footnote little
shameful secret shoved it under the rug
that oh yeah right the country is built
on Chloe genocide it's deeply dishonest
in no way inspiring in no way
revolutionary document the Charter of
Rights and Freedoms the constitution of
Canada it utterly fails to do the things
a constitution ought to do and I also
pointed out to the professor that
contrary to what he'd said this is not a
secular document describing the
government Canada as a sort of atheist
and progressive one that the very first
sentence perhaps he was overlooking it
declares that Canada is it actually
declares the Canada's a theocracy
basically if or taken seriously it opens
with a religious pronouncement or
religious
declaration this can't be read as
document defining a secular state if you
think about what it is that a
constitution is supposed to do or what
it is that a Charter of Rights and
Freedoms is supposed to do that is
precisely what Canada's Constitution in
Canada's charters and freedoms refuses
to do because what it tells you is that
you have all the rights and freedoms
that would be reasonable in a democratic
society and those freedoms are only
limited in a way that would be
justifiable or reasonable in a
democratic society you have to define in
this same document what is reasonable
what is justice what is the Parsee what
is democrat this this document is
supposed to be telling you precisely
what it refuses to tell you and in
practice what does this mean what would
the Canadian public in general if that's
the point if you're supposed to take a
poll and ask people what they think is
reasonable like as if this document
right now isn't supposed to tell them if
you do it the other way around
obviously all you're gonna be able to
hear from the Canadian public is some
kind of ill informed imitation of
American society because the American
idea of democracy is what they're
familiar with from television and movies
our constitution in 1982 was an
opportunity to slam the door on a racist
past on a colonialist fast on a British
imperial past the Government of Canada
utterly failed to slam the door they
produced a document that absolutely
nobody is proud of and I have to tell
you I'm born and raised in Canada I'm a
Canadian citizen I'm living in a country
that I myself am in no way proud of I
feel tremendously ashamed of my country
and this constitution written during my
own lifetime is a big part of that
political conflicts at their worst tend
to resemble religious conflicts and the
discussion of politics never seems more
religious than one more
Abell written constitutions that's not
because people believe in constitutions
in the same sense that they believe in a
religion however people have the same
sense of hopelessness about
constitutions that whatever the
Constitution may say good or bad it's
something they can never hope to change
themselves it's something that you know
for overcome themselves these documents
that often in the time that they were
written
supposedly stated the lofty optimistic
aspirations for a better world of their
authors instead become a kind of ceiling
limit you know a kind of encumbrance
that every wants to work around because
well no matter how bad it may be that's
the Constitution and we're stuck with it
that illusion is pervasive here in
Canada even though our Constitution was
only written in 1982 and nobody in
Canada regards any of the authors of
that Constitution with any special
respect they don't have the aura of
heroic revolutionaries like say Mao
Zedong has in China they don't have the
aura of great intellectuals that many of
the contributors to the American
Constitution still have in American
politics they're thought of as brilliant
men and creative writers who wrote
interesting books and you lived
remarkable lives absolutely no illusion
of this kind exists in Canada and yet
still the Constitution inspires this
sense of almost religious dread and
hopelessness when you talk to Muslims
who are trying to be good people and
live in the modern world and lead a
rational life but who are also trying to
maintain their status as pious Muslims
to some extent they have this same
feeling about what's written in the
Quran and what's written in hadith like
well whatever it says there we're stuck
with it so you can rationalize it you
can make excuses you can work around
with it but there's no way to change it
even worse the examination of
constitutions has this strange sort of
blindness
on the part of the reader that religious
texts also seem to inspire
I have experienced as a scholar of
Buddhism and have a whole long life of
very peculiar political activism it's
amazing that you can be sitting next to
someone who's a pious Buddhist and show
them what the text says and point with
your finger word by word and they still
don't see it and they still they won't
admit to themselves what the texts
Oakland that says if you ask them what
do you think this means they let
themselves think it through clearly I'm
sure some of you have this experience in
Christianity or Islam whatever their
religion may be when you really just try
to get someone to talk to key word by
word think about what this short
paragraph says think about these few
sentences they will see things that are
not there in the text and they will also
refuse to see things that are there and
I've had that experience again and again
even with professors at the University
of Toronto even with professor at the
University of Victoria who are thus of
themselves
supposedly activists representing our
native people or their left-wing
activists trying to make the world a
better place under one any or another
there's a fundamental refusal to see
this text for what it is and I think
these two impulses are linked because if
you can really admit to yourself how
mediocre or even awful this text is then
that immediately leads to the impulse to
change it reform it improve it or do
better and then that leads to that sense
of hopelessness that sense of religious
dread you know nobody even knows who
wrote the Bible the anonymous authors of
the Bible who were imperfect in so many
ways the Bible is full of errors and
repetition and self contradiction but
whatever it is if you believe in it
we're stuck with it and it can't be
changed this same sense of dread manages
to haunt canted at the Canada in
relation to a documents written in 1982
that nobody believes in nobody even
feels the sense of foolish pride the
Americans have that they have the best
country in the world with the best
Constitution in the world and the
Shania's why how did we come to be a
nation so utterly resigned to its own
mediocrity the planet is dying the
government hates I see animals are
leaving the aliens are contacting us we
might be alone it just might be you and
me but that's okay because you really
need anyone else